6 January 2023 South Africa is currently experiencing severe rains in the Provinces of KwaZulu-Natal and Mpumalanga, with downpours also reported in parts of Gauteng and Limpopo.  As seen during previous incidents of such rainfall, this may lead to localised flooding in susceptible areas especially informal areas and low lying bridges.  Difficult driving conditions can be expected on dirt roads and extreme caution is advised.  In such driving conditions visibility is often poor and roads slippery. Mudslides can also be anticipated which can lead to a loss of lives and damage to property. “Upon receipt of South African Weather Service (SAWS) warnings on 04 January 2023, government through the National and Provincial Disaster Management Centres (PMDC), activated Provincial Joint Operating Centres (JOCs), comprising of municipalities, relevant sector departments, state agencies, and social partners, including the SAWS to ensure preparedness and that appropriate response and recovery mechanisms are put in place”, said Michael Currin Acting Director-General of the GCIS. The PDMCs held a special JOC to review and adopt the incident assessment forms to cater for and address the needs of women, children, the elderly, and Persons with Disabilities during disaster management processes. Government continues to ensure that disaster management protocols are put in place and better measures are activated to assist communities affected by inclement weather conditions. “Citizens are urged to stay indoors in cases of heavy rain and stormy weather. Parents and guardians are urged to be extra vigilant and ensure the safety and security of their children.  Never try to walk, swim or drive through fast-moving flood water and please be vigilant for washed out roads, earth slides, and downed trees or power lines”, Currin added. As a precaution, motorists are advised to postpone or delay travel to the affected areas. Government along with other stakeholders will be providing disaster relief support to affected communities to ensure that emergency relief is distributed to all the affected communities as and when needed. Government and the South African Weather Service will continue to provide information on severe weather based on observations and predictions. In case of emergency, contact the municipal disaster management centres or the nearest police station or call the national emergency numbers (112, 10177 or 107).  More information is available on the GCIS website on www.gcis.gov.za . Enquiries: Michael Currin082 462 7896Acting Director-General: GCIS